technote about relay-style connections (#341)
apollographql/docs: src/content/technotes/TN0029-relay-style-connections.mdx

---
title: Relay-style connections FAQ
id: TN0029
tags: [best practices, schema design]
---

### What are Relay-style connections?

> [Relay](https://relay.dev) is an opinionated GraphQL client, and the [Connections specification](https://relay.dev/graphql/connections.htm) defines a pattern for expressing one-to-many relationships in a GraphQL schema.

Reviewer: I would note that FB/Meta is behind this specification as it provides necessary context to the below section re: Newsfeed.

```graphql
query MyPosts($cursor: String) {
  viewer {
    posts(first: 5, after: $cursor) {
      edges {
        node {
          id
          title
          content
        }
        cursor
      }
      pageInfo {
        hasNextPage
        endCursor
      }
    }
  }
}
```

<ExpansionPanel title="View the GraphQL schema for the above operation">

```graphql
type Query {
  viewer: User
}

type User {
  id: ID!
  posts(first: Int, after: String, last: Int, before: String): PostConnection!
}

type PostConnection {
  edges: [PostEdge!]!
  pageInfo: PageInfo!
}

type PostEdge {
  node: Post
  cursor: String!
}

type Post {
  id: ID!
  title: String
  content: String
}

type PageInfo {
  hasNextPage: Boolean!
  hasPreviousPage: Boolean!
  startCursor: String
  endCursor: String
}
```

</ExpansionPanel>

> It's worth noting that Facebook designed connections for their Newsfeed feature with these features:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's worth noting that Facebook designed the Connections specification for their Newsfeed feature with these features in mind:
```

Reviewer: or this vs. the above note.

- It uses cursor-based pagination.
- It supports paging backward (with the `before` cursor) and forward (with the `after` cursor).
- Each item in the list has a cursor you can use to jump to a specific page in the middle of the list.

These features might not perfectly meet your requirements or the capabilities of your downstream data sources.

### Do I have to use Relay-style connections?

No, unless you're using the Relay client. But its popularity outside of the Relay ecosystem is worth taking advantage of:

- Many developers are familiar with the pattern.
- It encapsulates several schema design best practices.
- It's designed to be future-proof and support gradual evolution of your GraphQL schema.

### Do I even need a wrapper type for my lists?

Consider the ["Zero, One, Infinity" rule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero_one_infinity_rule) — can you definitively assert that your list will never require pagination or other metadata about the relationship?

> Apollo recommends always using a wrapper type for lists.

Reviewer: This feels off to me- not really sure how to say why that is (or maybe it's just the lack of qualifier).

Author: added a little more about leaving room to evolve the schema without breaking changes

> Apollo recommends always using a wrapper type for lists so that you can gracefully evolve your schema without breaking existing clients.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using a wrapper type for lists allows you to gracefully evolve your schema without breaking existing clients.
```

This document serves as our recommendation but I can bet that if we put "Apollo recommends..." anywhere we are going to get some push back internally and externally

### Are there other ways to design your schema for pagination?

Yes. If your requirements or downstream capabilities don't fit the Relay-style connections spec, we recommend using a different set of conventions so that it's clear to graph consumers that they shouldn't expect to use Relay connection patterns.

Here's an example of pagination that uses page offsets and supports a UI for jumping to a specific page.

<ExpansionPanel title="An alternative to Relay-style connections">

```graphql
query MyPosts($page: Int) {
  viewer {
    posts(page: $page) {
      nodes {
        id
        title
        content
      }
      totalPages
    }
  }
}
```

```graphql
type Query {
  viewer: User
}

type User {
  id: ID!
  posts(page: Int): PostsPaginated!
}

"""
This wrapper type uses a different suffix to distinguish
it from Relay-style connection wrappers.
"""
type PostsPaginated {
  """
  Using `nodes` avoids the redundant
  `{ posts { posts { id } } }` selection set.
  """
  nodes: [Post!]!

  """
  Adding pagination metadata directly to the
  wrapper type works well.
  """
  totalPages: Int!
}

type Post {
  id: ID!
  title: String
  content: String
}
```

</ExpansionPanel>

> ### Can I use Relay-style connections with Apollo Federation?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Can I use Relay-style connections with Apollo Federation?
```

> Yes! You define the schema and resolvers for the connection relationship within a single subgraph so Federation has almost no ramifications on the pattern.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Yes! You define the schema and resolvers for the connection relationship within a single subgraph, so federation has almost no ramifications on the pattern.
```

> The one exception is the `PageInfo` type, which is commonly has a consistent defintion for all connections. You must mark it as `@shareable` to define it in multiple subgraphs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The one exception is the `PageInfo` type, which commonly has a consistent definition for all connections. You must mark this type's definition as `@shareable` to define it in multiple subgraphs:
```

```graphql
type PageInfo @shareable {
  hasNextPage: Boolean!
  hasPreviousPage: Boolean!
  startCursor: String
  endCursor: String
}

> ```

Reviewer: This feels like a doc all alone tbh

Author: Is there more to talk about here?

Reviewer: Weren't there a few conversations about handling Global IDs in the Relay spec? Or are we scoping this specifically for Connections?

Author: yeah i'm leaving global ids and Query.node for another note
